# A Portfolio for COML 1650-401 - Timothy Lie

## Subjectivity & Contextualization: the First Fruits of the Digital Humanities
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I remember when coming into the first class for our course, I was very nervous about what I was going to learn. As a Biology major, I never really delved into the humanities. It was hard for me to enjoy reading, and I didn’t have an inclination to see the deeper meanings in the arts. I grew up with a great appreciation for music and almost pursued it as a career, but everything else was never my forte. So, for our first day, I was worried that I’d be already behind. In this franticness, I tried to jot down every note from the readings and videos that we were assigned for the first day of class. However, something that really stuck with me from that very first assignment was Giorgia Lupi’s lecture, “[Finding Humanity in Data](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gw4S1uocTcY)”. Lupi expressed the importance of data not being an objective truth about reality, but rather a subjective perspective of what we believe to be truth. Lupi expressed that data (i.e., raw data) is not something we, as humans, can understand naturally; data needs to be sorted, chunked, and transformed into something that we can interpret. This concept of data being a subjective truth was foreign to me. In the laboratory that I work in, much of the data that we collect—from micrograph images, to RNA sequencing data, to biochemical assays—is taken as objective truth of the world that we live in. The reason why HIF-1α levels, for example, are elevated in SARS-CoV-2-infected HEK-293T cells is because hypoxia is induced. That is truth, and nothing can change that. However, much of my perspective in data and understanding it has evolved through this course. Data is not some number on a page that is the end-all-be-all; data is something that can, and needs, to be contextualized to be further understood. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A manifestation of this epiphany that I had was my experience at Iffy Books when I created my own cassette tape. Earlier in the semester, I went to a store called [Iffy Books](https://iffybooks.net/) which hosted workshops that people were free to attend to. In one of their workshops, we were allowed to record a cassette mixtape of any songs or audio clips that we wanted to include. I chose two songs, both being in Indonesian; the first a [love song](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D-VytLhH-KE), the second a [Christian worship song](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1w6EzJ2nr5Y). To a non-Indonesian speaker “analyzing” this cassette tape, these songs could just be nice melodies. That is the “objective truth” of the data within the tape. However, an Indonesian speaker could understand the meaning of why I chose these songs. These songs told about my life as an Indonesian-American that grew up in Philadelphia. I grew up speaking the language with my immigrant parents, and I always attended my Indonesian church which was like a second home. The subjectivity of data started to become more apparent alongside the importance of contextualizing such data. I still remember this experience so clearly because of how eye-opening it was. This bridged the gap of digital humanities by allowing me to explore the field with a way which I was already familiar with: music. I think this also affirmed my interest in music and pushed me forward to exploring digital humanities through the perspective of music. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So, when we began our project in analyzing the newspaper articles that were printed in Eastern State Penitentiary (ESP), I already had the idea of pursuing music in mind. I was reminded of our visit to ESP and the harsh living conditions instilled onto its residents. In the prison's earliest days, the audio tour described the lack of social interaction and the favor for solitary confinement. Prisoners were hooded whenever they were outside their cells, which I found very unsettling from the images on display. How could I take any of the information provided by my experience at the ESP and perform a metaanalysis with articles from the Umpire which included music? From the assignments throughout the semester, I deem this one as being the most challenging. I remember feeling lost in the beginning of the project, asking Professor Trettein whether I should make an itemized list of the songs often played at ESP. In this confusion, I finally synthesized a [manuscript](https://printinginprisons.org/blog/liet/) analyzing how music affected life at ESP by looking at the Honor and Friendship Club and primary articles about John H. Evans, a bugle player. Learning about Evans truly contextualized the person described in the Umpire and added a layer of humanity to who he was. In a society where being a felon is considered a “master status”, or a status which surpasses all other titles, learning about Evans through the Umpire was a perspective that I have found appreciable. In this project, what I found also very interesting was the ability to code. Using GitHub and being able to write minimal code was completely new to me, so doing this for the project made it far more engaging that simplifying submitting a Google Doc essay. The multimedia aspect of the project was exciting and something I hope to implement in the future.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In our final project at [Education Commons](https://www.library.upenn.edu/ec), I felt that compiling all the information I learned from class with the experience I had at Iffy Books and Eastern State Penitentiary really made jumping into the deep end much easier. Similarly to the previous project, I felt lost (looking back, I think “feeling lost” was such a common theme for me simply because of how digital humanities was so new to me). However, after being introduced to all the tools at Education Commons and speaking with my groupmates, we immediately jumped into synthesizing our project and worked as efficiently as a well-oiled machine. Everybody went into their respective roles with little to no conflict. After all these experiences, my perspective of digital humanities changed from a field working with archives to a nuanced field in understanding the complexities and subjectivity of the human condition through technology. All-in-all, I am satisfied with the work that I produced in this course, especially considering that this is my first time engaging in Digital Humanities.

## Looking Forward
